---
layout: default-md
section: The Spirits Book
title: Question 258
subtitle: In vestibulum massa quis arcu lobortis tempus. Nam pretium arcu in odio vulputate luctus.
---

### 258. In the state of erraticity, and before taking on a new corporeal existence, does a spirit foresee the things which will happen to him in that new existence?

“He chooses for himself the kind of trials which he will undergo, and it is in this freedom of choice that his freewill consists.”

– It is not God, then, who imposes upon him the tribulations of life as a chastisement?

“Nothing comes to pass without the permission of God, for it is He who has established all the laws that rule the universe. You would have to inquire why He has made such and such a law, instead of taking some other way. In giving to a spirit the liberty of choice, He leaves to him the entire responsibility of his acts and of their consequences. There is nothing to bar his future; the right road is open to him as freely as the wrong road. But if he succumbs, there still remains to him the consoling fact that all is not over with him, and that God in His goodness allows him to recommence the task which he has done badly. You must, moreover, always distinguish between what is the work of God’s will and what is the work of man’s will. If a danger threatens you, it is not you who have created this danger, but God; but you have voluntarily elected to expose yourself to this danger, because you have seen in so doing a means of advancement, and God has permitted you to do so.”

### REFERENCE
Spirits Book 2, Chapter 6 | Choice of Trials


### Related
TODO

### See Also
TODO