---
title: Spiritism - Frequently Asked Questions
description: Would you like to know more about Spiritism? Check our FAQ.
image: "images/featured-post/post-4.jpg"
type: "post"
date: "2019-01-01"
topics:
- spiritism
---

[Spiritism](../) is at the same time a [Science](../science), a
[Philosophy](../philosophy) and a [Religion](../religion) at the same time. 

Spiritism is also confused with Spiritualism and much-incorrectly criticized for
people how barely know it.

On this page, we list some of the most frequently asked questions, some of them,
very incorrect.

### 1- Is Spiritism part of the occult?  
The dictionary defines Occult as meaning:

>1. Hidden and difficult to see; “an occult fracture”;  
2. Having an import not apparent to the senses nor obvious to the intelligence;
beyond ordinary understanding; “mysterious symbols”; “the mystical style of
Blake”; “occult lore”; “the secret learning of the ancients”.

It is true that in the past, and still today those who do not understand
Spiritism claim that is part of the occult. This has always been untrue.

By its very nature Spiritism works to clarify and explain both the spirit
related phenomena, spitit evolution and the [divine laws](/divine-laws) that
govern the universe to anyone who wishes to learn. 

So in no way is it mysterious, hidden, beyond ordinary understanding, or counter
intuitive.

### 2- Is Spiritism pagan?  
The dictionary defines Paganism as:

> Not acknowledging the God of Christianity and Judaism and Islam.

This is an ironic question since the [very first answer given by the spirit
teachers](/books/spirits-book) as part of the [Spiritist
Codification](../codification) defines and acknowledges the existence of one
true [God](/about/god).

Spiritism also goes on to acknowledges the inherent truths found not just in the
three major western religions, but the sparks of truth found in all religions.

### 3- Is Spiritism anti-Jesus ?  
To be ‘anti’ something is defined as:

> A person who is opposed to something, such as a group, policy, proposal, or
> practice.

This is definitely not the way Spiritism sees [Jesus](/about/jesus). On the
contrary Jesus is seen as a [pure spirit](/about/pure-spirit), who
[incarnated](/about/incarnated) and was the greatest of all our teachers. A
person who’s sacrifice to be again reborn, tortured and then killed by those he
wanted to enlighten, is seen as one of the most profound acts of love in human
history.

### 4- Spiritism is about telling the future?
On the subjects of fortune telling and/or predictions Spiritism is very clear
that such things are impossible. For two reasons: first since anyone possessing
such knowledge would imply that this person has a quality only supposedly
possessed by God. And second: since this would imply that we do not truly
possess the gift of freedom of choice from God.

What spiritism does clarify is that evolved Spirits who understand the details
of divine laws, can look at a persons life, motivations and past decisions and
make an educated guess as to the consequences of such choices on a person’s
future. But this is in no way foretelling the future, just like having a
financial planner tell you the best way to retire at 40, will in no way be an
assurance that this will happen.

It is also important to note that even if an evolved Spirit can make an educated
guess on the future events of a certain person, this Spirits’ ability to
communicate this possible occurrence is limited by the Law of Cause and Effect.
If part of an incarnated person’s trial is to have to endure this future event
without any forewarning then the Spirit will not be allowed to communicate the
warning.

### 5- Is Spiritism a religion?
Religion is defined as:  

– A personal or institutionalized system grounded in such belief and worship. –
The life or condition of a person in a religious order. – A set of beliefs,
values, and practices based on the teachings of a spiritual leader.

This question was answered best when Kardec said:
> Spiritism is a philosophical doctrine with religion effects, as is any
spiritualist philosophy, because it inevitably reaches to the roots of all
religions: God, soul, and future life. But it is not a constituted religion,
since it has no services, no rituals, no temples, and no one among its adherents
received the title of priest or high priest.” Posthumous Works- Allan Kardec

### 6- Is Spiritism about demon/spirit worship?
Part of the mistaken belief that Spiritism is a pagan religion and occult
related has led to the belief that Spiritism is demon worship.

Spiritism clearly explains that a ‘demon’ is just a fellow person, now
discarnated, who has become trapped in the cycle of violence, cruelty, ignorance
and hate. In no way would such a person be worshiped. Instead such individuals
must be prayed for, so God will help inspire them to seek the path of progress.

As for the related claim that Spiritist worship spirits. Again, Spiritism
teaches us that there is only one God, and that spirits are just our fellow
persons who are discarnated. Under such realizations, why would a Spiritist
worship a fellow spirit?

### 7- Is Spiritism just another pseudoreligious scam?
Spiritism teaches that a Spiritist must NEVER profit from charity or
dissemination of the teachings. A true Spiritist has an unrelated paying
job/profession and does their Spiritist related work for its own sake, not for
personal gain.

“Freely ye have received, freely give. St Matthew, 10. 8”

Spiritism, as said in question 4, is not a religion implied or otherwise. As for
its validity, there are millions of Spiritists all over the world. Nonetheless,
accepting the teachings of Spiritism is a very personal choice.

### 8- Is Spiritism all about ghosts?
Spiritism does explain what ‘ghosts’ and related spirit manifestations really
are, their causes and effects. But its focus is not about ‘ghost’ or Spirits. It
reveals the truth about God, the immortal spirit, reincarnation, divine laws,
reasons for suffering, life’s trials and the steps we must all take to evolve
and reach our true potential. The subjects of Spirits and mediumship are a small
part of a much larger group of teachings.

### 9-Spiritism teaches that all religions are false?

As we started to explain in question number 2, Spiritism teaches us that all
religions are valid. Each one is a distinct path to God, possessing many of the
great truths that God has revealed to humanity through many missionaries
(prophets) in our history.

Spiritists believe that the wisdom and knowledge revealed to us in the
codification is just a further detailed clarification of the truths God revealed
to the religious prophets of the past.

### 10- Spiritists charge fees for card readings, good luck charms and other services?

No, as said before in question 7, a Spiritist can never profit from charity or
dissemination of the Spirit teachings. Sadly nothing stops an unethical
individual from using the title ‘spiritist’ to make money. God has given us all
free will, and the ability to take whatever path we wish to take. Though
eventually we must all face the consequences of our choices.

### 11- Spiritist are a branch of ‘santerisimo’, worshiping the dead?

“Santeria” is defined as: An African-based religion similar to voodoo,
originating in Cuba and Brazil, which combines the worship of traditional
Yoruban deities with the worship of Roman Catholic saints.

Spiritism does not teach the worship of ancestors, ghosts, spirits or anyone
other than God (as explained in question 6). Because many native religions
worship ‘spirits’ or dead ancestors, to whom they attribute great powers, some
have made the mistaken conclusion that Spiritism is somehow related to
santerismo. It is in no way related.

It is important to note that Spiritism explains why the animal sacrifices common
in ‘santeria’ and other religious groups are not just misguided and unethical,
but also have the opposite effect intended.

### 12- Is Spiritism dangerous?

Spiritism is knowledge from the spirit teachers. And knowledge is not inherently
dangerous.

Living a way of life based on these Spirit teachings (as explained in question
5) will help bring about great ethical progress and many rewards in the
afterlife, certainly there is nothing dangerous about this.

What is dangerous is ignorance. Ignorance in the form of those who do not study
spiritism to gain wisdom, but to try and use it as a tool for personal gain.
Under such circumstances any knowledge can be dangerous. One should not blame
the tool for acts of misuse; but rather those who have willingly misused the
tool.

### 13- Is Spiritism about spirit possessions and exorcisms?

Spiritism explains that spirit possession is a misnomer. That in fact there is
no such occurrence, what happens is that an ignorant person chooses to succumb
to what is always an outsider’s influence. As for an exorcism, that is a
Catholic religious ritual in no way related to Spiritism. Again, as explained in
question 8, the focus of Spiritism is not ghosts or spirits.

### 14- Isn’t the science in Spiritism just a lot of pseudoscientific nonsense?

The first spirit teachings were revealed to the scientist and educator Allan
Kardec in the 1850s-60s. Yet far from being nonsense, its revelations about
nature continue to be slowly proven by modern science. Concepts such as multi
dimensions, evolution, plurality of worlds and electromagnetic waves are just a
few of the ones first revealed in Spiritism and confirmed by human science.

Since Allan Kardec, thousands of books of Spirit teachings have been written on
every scientific subject imaginable. In Brazil and many other countries the
conclusions of the scientific knowledge presented by the Spirit teachers has
been recognized and validated. In the USA the now common use of past life
regressions, and the use of alternative, faith related healing methods all have
their origins in Spirit teachings.

### 15- Didn’t Jesus say that talking to spirits is wrong?

Jesus never speaks for or against communicating with spirits. It is true that
the old testament (the prophets) certainly forbid communicating with spirits.

To understand why it was forbidden, a few things about life at that time, and
the nature of Spirit communication needs to be understood:

People of that time were extremely ignorant,lacking even the most basic
understanding of God or morality. So the prophets had to use a policy of total
fear and control in order to force people to start to give up their destructive,
selfish ways. This ignorance was so great that even after the 10 commandments
were recognized as law, it still took Jesus being reborn on earth, his torture
and death, to begin to clarify in these people an understanding of God.

It was this need for absolute control that forced the prophets to forbid
comunicating with Spirits, in order for no other outside forces to interfear
with the teachings from God they intended their people to learn.

You are probably wondering why some Spirits would dare contradict God’s
teachings.

Spiritism gives us a clear answer:

Spirits are nothing more than disincarnated people in diffrent states of
evolution. So ignorant people in life, remain ignorant after death since the
process of learning and evolving is a very slow one. Those spirits who have
evolved and achieved purity are the ones God sends as guides (angels) and as
teachers. The problem is that these extremely ignorant people totally lacked the
ability to make such distinctions.

In order for a medium, back then, or today to be able to communicate with wise,
loving, teacher spirits he/she must be a strong, ethical and well disciplined
individual.

The Spiritist teachings of the 1860s were the first time when a clear and
concise guide to train a medium and make such distinctions was ever made
available. So it is perfectly reasonable that communicating with spirits be
forbidden until such instructions were in place, and people possesed the ability
to understand them.

Once again, as we said in question 8, Spiritism is not all about mediums and
communicating with spirits, but it does include the guide we mentioned above.

### 16- Are all Spiritist mediums?

According to the teachings received by Allan Kardec from the Spirits, everyone
is a medium. The difference is that some people have what is called ostensive
mediumship. But, having said that, being a Spiritist and a medium are two
separate concepts. A Spiritist is a person who believes certain ideas , lives a
certain way, and understands God’s divine laws (as explained in previous
questions). A Spiritist certainly does not need to be a medium to be a
Spiritist.

Mediumship is just the ability to communicate with spirits. Any person ignorant
or good can have this gift. A person of any religion, social class, gender or
nationality can be born with this ability. Mediumship will not automatically
make them a Spiritist. Just as being a Spiritist will not automatically make
anyone a medium.

What is also important to remember is that what a person does with this gift,
like anything else in their lives, is a matter of free will.

### 17- A medium could be talking to demons, right?

Again, there are no such things as demons, only spirits of different levels of
evolution (as explained in question 6). What kind of spirits a medium talks to
or ignores, is based on the same common sense principles as in any conversation
in ordinary life.

A good person meets someone on the street and through conversation can judge if
the person they are talking to is also a good person, or a selfish destructive
person. The good person can then choose to listen and follow or ignore and not
follow this person based on that judgment.

While an ignorant person meets someone on the street and through unreasoned
impulse (an ignorant person lives by their impulses) may feel affinity to this
person because they both share the same ignorance or may feel repulsed by this
person because the person is more ethical and challenges a self centered way of
life. The ignorant person then chooses to befriend the equally ignorant person
and ignore the good person.

### 18- Spiritism allows mediums to do what they want?

Spiritism provides, among its many other teachings, an explanation as to why a
certain kind of spirit chooses a certain kind of medium. And it explains the
divine laws that govern these communications. As for the conduct of a medium who
is a Spiritist, if he or she ignores divine law and chooses to live a selfish
destructive life then that person is only a Spiritist in name.

To help clarify the spirit teachings on this subject, below is the reasonable
standard for the two types of medium spirit relationships: A medium who is a
good person, who lives an ethical life and strives to always be a better person
talks to a spirit and quickly judges the spirits true intentions: realizes if
the intentions are good or ignorant and then chooses to continue the
communication or end the communication.

A medium who is undisciplined, selfish, cruel and destructive talks to a spirit
but lacks the wisdom to make distinctions based on ethical principles. Instead
this ignorant medium follows only unreasoned, self-centered impulses and will
feel comfortable only around spirits who are equally undisciplined, selfish,
cruel and destructive. Because of this affinity the medium will embrace and
follow what ever this ignorant spirit tells them. And by contrast when a good
spirit comes along and tries to communicate with this medium, the medium will
feel no affinity, be repulsed and ignore the good spirit’s messages.

In Mark 7 verses 17,18 and 20 Jesus gives us all a clear guide to making good
judgments about people or spirits.  17 Even so every good tree bringeth forth
good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.  18 A good tree cannot
bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.  20
Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

### 19- In spiritism isn’t the spirit in control of the medium?

No, this is not true. As explained in a previous question spirit possession is a
myth. At no point is the outside force (the spirit) forcibly taking control of
the medium.

Of course many mediums who have been tools of destructive, cruel and hurtful
Spirits claim that they are unwilling victims of these unethical spirits. But
here is where the spirit teachings explain why this is untrue.

The spirits attracted to a medium directly reflect that person’s ethical
evolution, and their mediumistic training. So an evolved medium will attract
more evolved spirits while an ignorant medium will attract ignorant, destructive
spirits. Once the spirit is attracted and wants to communicate through the
medium, only the medium possesses the final choice to permit the comunication.
What happens is that for ignorant and untrained mediums, there is no willingness
to choose which spirits to allow communication with and which not to. Since
their ignorance attracts equally ignorant spirits, they are the ones that will
end up being channeled. As for the claims of mediums being unwilling victims,
part of the claim is denial, and the other is biological. An untrained medium
many times does not recall the events just before, and during a spirit
communication, so they claim a lack of control over the situation. Even though
this is untrue.

All mediums need to understand that they will be held responsible for any and
all results of a sproitit communication. This is why medium training and the
ethical growth of the medium is so critical.

### 20- If Spiritists do not follow a religion why do they believe in reincarnation like Buddists?

Reincarnation is defined as:

1. Rebirth of the soul in another body.
2. A reappearance or revitalization in another form; a new embodiment: 3 :
   Embodiment in a new form (specially the reappearance of a person in another
   form); 4 – In the Hindu or Buddhist doctrine that person may be reborn
   successively into one of five classes of living beings (god or human or
   animal or hungry ghost or denizen of hell) depending on the person’s own
   actions

Spiritism does not define reincarnation in the Hindu or Buddist way. The Spirit
teachers revealed that when God creates a spirit it is simple and ignorant.
God’s plan is for the spirit (all of us) to evolve intellectually and ethically,
passing from a lower order to a higher one, until we attain perfection, and
become God’s workers.

God in his infinite charity gives a Spirit all the time the individual needs to
go through this long process of evolution. So a Spirit incarnates on Earth,
learns a lifetime worth of lessons through trials, discarnates , then
reincarnates and the cycle continues over and over again. In each reincarnation
the spirit learns (or at least tries to learn) new lessons based on the new
point of view and circumstances provided by that new human incarnation. This
cycle continues until the Spirit has learned all the lessons needed on Earth in
order to progress to a higher level of evolution.

### 21- Spiritists have to be wrong, because the bible says their is no reincarnation, doesn’t it?

Actually a belief in reincarnation was prevalent in the Jewish culture of the
Old Testament and during the time of Jesus. It became part of early Christian
thought championed by the great Christian theologian Origen of Alexandria, but
was eventually labeled hearsay in the Concile of Constantinople in the year 553
AC

Many examples in the Old Testament still remain that hint toward the Jewish
belief in reincarnation. Such as Genesis 28:12 Jacob’s Ladder, Job 14:7-9 ,
Psalm 16:10,11, Psalm 51:10,12, Isaiah 25:8, Isaiah 26:19 and Jeremiah 18:1,6.

But the most direct reference to reincarnation still present in the bible is
found in the New Testament and relates to the prophesy of Elijah/Elias:

Jewish Old Testament prophecy foretold that the return of the prophet
Elijah/Elias would precede the birth of the Messiah (Jesus)

“Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and
dreadful day of the Lord.  And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the
children and the heart of the children to the fathers… Malachi 4:5,6”

And so in the New Testament it talks about how John the Baptist was ‘the return’
of Elias.

Mat 11:14 And if ye will receive [it], this is Elias, which was for to come.
Mat 16:14 And they said, Some [say that thou art] John the Baptist: some, Elias;
and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.  Mar 9:13 But I say unto you, That
Elias is indeed come, and they have done unto him whatsoever they listed, as it
is written of him.  Luke 9:8 And of some, that Elias had appeared; and of
others, that one of the old prophets was risen again.

How could any society that rejected reincarnation believe that the long ago dead
Elias had returned within the body of John the Baptist? And if this ‘return’ was
untrue, why does the claim come from the mouth of Jesus himself?

The conflict between the church and idea of reincarnation that Spiritist ,
people of biblical times, and Jesus himself held to be true exists because the
concept is contrary to the very basic Christian idea of an instant salvation.

Salvation according to Christian dogma came in the form of Jesus’ death on the
cross. This supreme sacrifice of the Son of God freed humanity from the original
sin and gave us the path to deliver us from the sins of daily life. For this
reason Christians must follow church dogma so they will receive this salvation
and not be trapped in purgatory, or condemned to Hell itself.

In the eyes of the church if a person can be reborn again and again then the
process of salvation is a slow one and in the hands of the individual, not the
church. This is why the concept was outlawed in the Concil of Constantinople in
the year 553 AC.

### 22- Spiritism is unchristian?

As explained in question 16, Spiritism and Christianity are at a difficult
impasse on the reincarnation issue, though Spiritism recognizes the validity and
holds great respect for all religions. As for the claim that it is
‘unchristian’, this is not true.

The dictionary defines the term ‘Christian’ as:

1. One who professes belief in Jesus as Christ or follows the religion based on
   the life and teachings of Jesus.
2. One who lives according to the teachings of Jesus.

The spirit teachers tell us that indeed Jesus was the savior described in Old
Testament prophecies. They also tell us that we need to follow the teachings of
Jesus as basics for an ethical way of life. So to say that Spiritist are
unchristian is false.

Of course the Spirit teachers do not agree with the literal definitions and
interpretations that Christian religions have given to the life and teachings of
Jesus. The Spiritist book called ‘The Gospel According to Spiritism’ explains in
detail the historical context of Jesus’ words and actions and in that way helps
clarify what kind of life and ethical path Jesus wanted us to take in our lives.
It is ironic that back in the 1860s the spirit teachers were enlightening us
about biblical history and context, and that is has taken biblical archeologists
more than 100 years to start coming to the same realizations about Jesus, his
life and teachings.

### 23- Is Spiritism a kind of cult to Spirits?

As said before in question 6, Spiritists do not worship spirits or anyone other
than God. As for a cult:

Cults can go by any name, and claim any beliefs; their purpose is to dominate
their members for the ego and profit of the groups’ leaders.

Spiritism is in no way for personal economic gain, for the domination or
manipulation of anyone. It is in no way a cult. In fact the spirit teachers say
that no one should ever be pressured, forced or unduly influenced to learn or
embrace Spiritism. Spiritists share their knowledge only with those who wish to
know more, and anyone studying Spiritism has the right to walk away if they feel
they no longer wish to continue these studies.

### 24- Spiritism is supposed to be a science, is it like Christian Science, Scientology or Intelligent design?
Christian science is:
* Protestant denomination founded by Mary Baker Eddy in 1866 [syn: Christian
Science, Church of Christ Scientist]
* religious system based on teachings of Mary Baker Eddy emphasizing spiritual
healing [syn: Christian Science]

Intelligent design is a theory that nature and complex biological structures
were designed by intelligent beings and were not created by chance; abbr. ID
Example: Intelligent design refers to the theory that intelligent causes are
responsible for the origin of the universe and of life in all its diversity

Scientology is a belief system developed by L. Ron Hubbard, based on a person
being an immortal spiritual being whose survival depends on him/herself and
his/her attainment of brotherhood with others and the universe

Spiritism is not a church nor a religion as stated in answer number 9, nor is it
any way related to Mary Baker Eddy’s Christian Science. Even though Spiritism is
based on the reality of the immortality of the soul, but other than that,
Spiritism has no connection to the teachings of L. Ron Hubbard.

As for Intelligent Design , as much as it sounds scientific, this theory is
actually an offshoot of Christian creationism, again completely unrelated to
Spiritism.

As for the first part of the question yes, Spiritism does have a scientific
aspect.

### 25- Isn’t Spiritism’s claims of being a science, a religion and a philosophy just a lot of nonsense?
The teachings of Spiritism have three basic aspects: Science, Religion and
Philosophy.

The knowledge of a religious nature (not a religion but having religious
implications) includes the information about Jesus, his teachings and ethical
way of life.

The knowledge of a philosophical nature includes the vast information about the
afterlife, the immortality of the spirit, the existence of God, divine laws, the
origins of Humankind and the universe.

The knowledge of a scientific nature includes explanations of the many
categories of Spirit related phenomena, reincarnation, mediumship, and the
influences the true spirit nature of man has on all the formal sciences such as
biology, physics, psychology, and chemistry etc.

### 26- Spiritism, is it like spiritualism?

Spiritualism:

The belief that the dead communicate with the living, as through a medium.

Certainly Spiritism believes in the existence and communication with Spirits.
But a spiritualist only believes in that mediumistic phenomena. Spiritism is the
acceptance of a vast amount of Spirit teachings in which mediumship is only one
small part. People who are uninformed commonly confuse the terms spiritualist
and spiritist, and their definitions. :

### 27- Is Spiritisim a kind of atheism?

No, one of the fundamental teachings of Spiritism is the understanding that one
true God does exist and that God is the Supreme Intelligence of the Universe.

### 28- Do Spiritists define God in the same way as Christians, Jews, and/or Muslims do?

No. Spiritism respects, recognizes the validity of, but does not share the
definition given to God by the major western religions.

Spiritist defines God as a divine, perfect being who is the principle cause of
all things.  To Spiritism God has no recognizable human shape, nor does he favor
certain groups, nor does he curse or punish those who sin and do not follow
‘his’ ways.

Spiritism sees God as a merciful loving creator who sees all the intelligent
beings (us) of his creation as equal. In his infinite wisdom and charity God
gives us the time (life times) we need to evolve and achieve our fullest
potential. Certainly God established divine laws and reasonable consequences
when those laws are not followed, but these are not curses or punishments, but
tools for learning from our mistakes.

This process of birth and rebirth, of learning and making mistakes and having to
endure the consequences, is part of the path to the amazing gifts that come with
our evolution. At no place in this long, difficult and personal journey of
evolution does God forsake or condemn us, no matter how many times we stumble
and fall.

Instead God provides each one of us with spirit guides (angels) to help us again
find our way, the opportunity to atone for those past errors and yet another
chance to continue on our path of evolution.

Surely this truly wise, all loving God was the one Jesus called Father and
carried in his heart!

### 29- Spiritism isn’t a religion, then why do they have churches?  
Spiritism has no churches, rituals, priests or dogmas. Many people with good but
misguided intentions who are spiritualist, or are ‘santeristas’ create churches
they call Spiritist. 

Sadly some less than honest individuals who are looking to exploit mediumistic
phenomena for profit also create churches they call Spiritist.

### 30- If Spiritists don’t have churches then what is SGNY and other such groups?  
What Spiritists who want to teach and expand their charitable work are
encouraged to do, by the spirit teachers, is to form non-profit centers for
study and charitable work. And we mean legal, government recognized non-profit
groups.

### 31- Spiritism talks about laws, are these like the laws of nature?  
Yes, but Spiritism reveals that the Laws of Nature cover both laws of physics
and ethical laws.  These divine moral and physical laws are those that govern
our existences and the rest of the universe.  Here are a very brief summery of
each:

Law of free will/of Liberty: There is no fate. From the moment of our creation
we are free to take whatever paths we wish to take. We can learn and evolve at
our own pace and deal with the consequences of our mistakes as we see fit. When
it is time for us to reincarnate we even choose our next existence and the
trials that we will learn from in that existence. Even the nature of our death
and length of our lives are in our hands.

Law of Cause and effect: We all possess the gift of free will, but eventually
the consequences of past choices push us into situations that correspond
directly to those choices. These effects are not punishments, but tools for
learning which is fundamental to our evolution.

So the trials, lessons, and progress of every reincarnation are the effects of
all our past decisions.  After every reincarnation a person’s spirit guide shows
them all the major decisions of that existence.  Emphasizing the intention
behind the action, the consequences of these actions and how these actions
affected others. 

Once a person has faced the very best and worst of themselves they choose how
the consequences of these actions will play out in their next existence.

### 32- This is all somewhat confusing, can a person make a distinction between a Spiritist center and one of these other places using the name ‘spiritist’?  
When you go to a Spiritist center (or one calling itself Spiritist) use good
sense.  If they want to sell you services, charms or holy water, if they use
rituals, have priests or ministers, and/or are associating themselves with
santeria, then they are not spiritist centers. 

That’s why it is important to educate yourself about Spiritism so you can make
the distinction between Spiritist organizations and those who use the label
Spiritist but represent completely different ideas.

## Source
Adapted from [SGNY: Myths And Misconceptions](http://www.sgny.org/spiritism-guide/myths-and-misconceptions/)  

## See Also 
[Learn Spiritism](../learn)  
[Spiritism - Teachings](../teachings)  
[Spiritism - History](../history)  
[Spiritism - The origin of Spiritism](../origin)  
[Spiritism - Science, Philosophy or Religion?](../science-philosophy-religion)  

