---
title: The History of Spiritism
description: Understand the history of Spiritism.
date: "2019-01-01"
topics:
- spiritistm
- death
- turning tables
- human being
- perispirit
---

By the year 1848, several strange phenomena were gaining notoriety in the United
States, consisting in noises, raps and movement of objects with no apparent
cause.  They would happen spontaneously, several times, with a characteristic
intensity and frequency.

However, it soon became clear that these phenomena could also occur through the
presence of certain people whom were known as ”mediums”.

These people could provoke the phenomena at will, making experiments possible.
Such experiments were made using tables, not because these objects are more
favorable than others, but because they were more convenient, movable, and
because it was easier to sit around them than any other furniture.

## Turning Tables In this way the rotation of tables was achieved, and
subsequently, movements in all directions: jumps, turns, fluctuations, violent
strokes etc.  These phenomena were originally called ‘table dancing’ or ‘table
turning’.

Initially the facts could be perfectly explained by the action of an electric or
magnetic current or unknown kind of fluid, and such was the first formed
explanation.

But within a short time, intelligent effects were recognized in them, such that
the movement obeyed the will.  The table could move to the right or to the left,
toward some certain person, it could stand on one or two feet upon command,
knock the ground a number of ordered times, knock regularly, etc.

## An Intelligent Cause It was clear that the cause was not purely physical and,
based upon the principle: ”To every effect a cause is associated, to every
intelligent effect there is an intelligent cause”, an intelligence was appointed
as the cause.

However, what was the nature of this intelligence? Such was the question.
Initial impressions were that it could be the reflection of the medium’s
intelligence or of his assistants.  But experience soon disproved this, since
responses totally alien to the thought and knowledge of the present people and
even in opposition to their ideas, wills or desires were obtained.

Therefore this intelligence could only belong to an invisible being.  The way to
ascertain this was quite simple: a discussion with such entity sufficed.  A
conventional number of knocks to signify a yes or no answer or to designate
alphabetical letters was created and, in this way, several chosen questions
obtained answers.

## Talking Tables This phenomenon was called [_talking
tables_](/about/talking-tables).  Interrogated in this way about their nature,
all the beings declared themselves to be spirits and belonging to an [invisible
world](/about/spiritual-world). 

As the phenomena were produced in different locations, through several different
people and observed by serious and intelligent people, it was not possible they
were an illusion.

From America the phenomena spread to France and the rest of Europe, where the
talking and turning tables were the rage and became a means of entertainment in
public halls. But when people began to tire of them, they turned their attention
toward other things.

## A new phenomena However, within a short time, the phenomenon presented itself
under a new aspect that removed it from the domain of a simple curiosity. But
the facts encountered many opponents.  Some of them, without taking into account
the integrity and impartiality of their investigators, would only consider the
phenomena as a fraud or a clever subtlety. Those who did not admit to anything
but matter, who did not believe in the invisible world, who thought that
everything finds its end in the death of the body, the materialists, in one
word, the so called strong spirits, they moved the existence of the invisible
spirits to the field of absurd tales. 

They considered those who took the subject seriously as crazy, and treated them
with sarcasms and mockeries.  Others who could not deny the facts and under the
influence of certain ideas, considered the phenomena an exclusive action of the
devil, trying, therefore, to frighten the timid.  However, today fear of the
devil has lost its popularity. In fact the subject became so popular and was
portrayed in so many ways that people got used to the idea, and many believed
that this was the time to find out what it really was. Aside from a few timorous
women, the communication of the true devil’s arrival was somewhat malicious for
those who had seen it only in pictures or in the theater. 

For many it was a powerful impulse and they tried to rise barriers against the
new ideas.  By doing so they involuntarily initiated an opposite reaction, and
so became the propagators of the ideas; the louder they cried the more efficient
they were. Other critics were also unsuccessful since the facts, carefully
verified by clear reasoning, provided only denials. When their publications are
analyzed the testimony of the ignorance and the lack of serious observation of
the facts are encountered everywhere.  Nowhere can one find a positive
demonstration of their impossibility. All of their argumentation are summed up
by the claims: ”I do not believe, therefore, it does not exist. All those who
believe are crazy. 

Only we have the privilege of reason and sound judgment.” The number of
believers resulting from the serious or comical criticisms was immense, because
only private opinions are found in them which are devoid of disproof. 

## A new form of communication The communication through raps was rather slow
and incomplete. It was discovered that, by attaching a pencil to a movable
object (such as a basket, a small board or a similar item, on which the fingers
could be placed), the object would begin to move and make signs. Later it was
discovered that such objects were only dispensable accessories. 

Experience has shown that the spirit who acted upon a unanimated body could in
the same way control the arms or the hands and lead the pencil. Writing mediums
then appeared, that is, people who could write in an involuntary manner under
the impulse of the spirits, being their interpreters and instruments.
Thenceforth the communications had no limits, and the exchange of thoughts was
as fast and easy as among the living.  It was a vast field opened to
exploration, the discovery of a new world: the world of the invisible, very much
the same as the microscope has unveiled the world of the infinitely small.

## The first contacts Who are these spirits? What is their role in the Universe?
What is their reason for communicating with the mortals?  Such were the first
questions demanding explanation. The spirits soon revealed that they were not
apart from creation, but were instead the very souls of those who had lived on
the earth or on other worlds. After having left their corporeal envelopes, they
populate and fly through the space. 

There was no room for doubt when friends and relatives were recognized among
them, furnishing proofs of their existence when interrogated.  They came to
demonstrate that death was only for their bodies, that their souls or spirits
continue to live, that they are very near us, that they can see us very much
like when they were alive.  They kindly watch over those whom they loved and
whose memories very much please them.

## A false idea In general we make a completely false idea of the spirits. They
are not abstract or vague beings as many would imagine. Also they are not a
glaring radiance or a spark, but are rather very real, having their own
individuality and definite form. We can have a approximate idea of them
according to the following explanation.

## The essence of the human being There are three essential things in human
beings:

* 1 - The soul or the spirit, the intelligent principle where the thoughts, will
  and moral sense are found. 
* 2 - The body, the material envelope, weighty and rough. The body enables the
  spirit relate with the material world. 
* 3 - The perispirit, the light fluidic envelope, which is the intermediary
  bound between the spirit and the body.

## What is death?  When the exterior covering is threadbare and can no more
work, the spirit get rid of it, like the fruit liberates itself from the shell
or as one forsake a clothing which is no longer useful. That is what we call
[death](/about/death).

Therefore, death is simply the destruction of the crude shell of the spirit;
only the body dies, not the spirit.  During life, the spirit is somewhat limited
by the material links of matter to which it is bounded.  These limits can many
times neutralize its faculties, and the body’s death liberates it from such
bounds setting it free (like the butterfly from its cocoon). 

## Spirit and Perispirt But the [spirit](/about/spirit) gives up only the
material body, keeping the [perispirit](/about/perispirit) which is a kind of
ethereal body, vaporous and very subtle to us. It has the human form which seems
to be the standard one.  In its normal state, the
[perispirit](/about/perispirit) is invisible, but the spirit can make certain
changes upon it so as to render it temporarily visible or able to be touched,
similar to what happens to condensed vapor. 

In this manner, the spirits can sometimes appear to us during apparitions. By
using the [perispirit](/about/perispirit), the spirit can act upon matter and
produce several phenomena of raps, movements, writing etc.

## Calling our attention Raps and movements are a way for the spirits to testify
their presence and to call our attention, like a person may do to make others
notice oneself. Some of them do not limit themselves to make moderate noises,
but instead produce a row of breaking dishes, of opening and closing doors or
disordered furnitures.

Through knocks and combined movements they are able to express their thoughts,
but writing, which they prefer, offers them the most complete, convenient and
fastest way. As they can make marks, so they also can lead the hands to drawn,
write music or play a piece in a musical instrument.  In few words, because they
lack physical bodies, they use a medium to manifest themselves to the human in a
sensible way.

## Seeing Spirits Spirits can also manifests themselves in several other ways,
including through vision and audition.  Certain people called hearing mediums,
have the capacity to listen to spirits and they can, therefore, talk to them.
Others, the seeing mediums can see them. Spirits which generally manifest
themselves visually appear in the same way as when they were alive, although in
a vaporous way. 

On other occasions, this form is so similar to a living being that it appears to
be almost a complete delusion.  They have sometimes been taken to be flesh and
blood humans which people talked to and shook hands without even suspecting they
were spirits, except for their later sudden disappearance.

The permanent and general capacity to see spirits is rare, but individual
apparitions specially at the moment of death, are very common. The released
spirit seems to hurry to see its relatives and friends again, as if it wished to
show them that it has just left the earth but wants to tell them it is still
alive.

## Supernatural?  By gathering individual recollection, many authentic but until
then unnoticed facts can be considered as having happened not only at night
during sleep, but during the day in the most complete state of wakefulness.  In
the past, these facts were considered as marvelous and supernatural and were
placed in the domain of wizardry and witchcraft. Today, however, the incredulous
attribute them to imagination and we, since the [spiritist science](/spiritism)
has given us the key, know how to produce them and that they do not leave from
the normal phenomenological order.

## Superior Wisdom?  It's important to also understand that the spirits, just
because they are spirits, should not be understood to have supreme knowledge and
wisdom; this is a mistaken understanding that experience did not delay to prove. 

Among the spiritual communications, there are those which are rich in sublime
profundity, eloquence, wisdom and [morals](/virtues) and reflect only good and
[benevolence](/virtues/benevolence). Others, however, are extremely vulgar,
futile, trivial and even rough.  Through these messages the spirits reveal their
most perverted instincts. It is clear that they can not come from the same
source and that, if there are good spirits, there are also bad ones. Since the
spirits are only the very souls of the human, they can not turn into perfect
beings after leaving their bodies. 

They keep the imperfections of their corporeal lives until final improvement.
Therefore, in their messages, we see all degrees of goodness and badness, of
wisdom and ignorance.

## Learning with the Spirits The spirits are generally happy to communicate and
are very satisfied to know that they were not forgotten.  They gladly describe
their impressions after leaving the earth, their new situation, the origin of
their happiness and suffering in their new world. Some are happy, others are
unhappy, suffering terrible torments according to the way in which they lived
and the good or bad use they made of their lives. 

By watching them in all phases of their new lives, paying attention to the
positions they occupied on earth, their types of death, their characters and
behaviors as human beings, we can come to a sufficiently accurate, if not
complete, knowledge of the [invisible world](/about/spiritual-world). Such
knowledge enables us the explanation of our future state and to foresee the
happy or sad destiny that waits for us there.

## Spiritism - a new Doctrine The instructions given by [superior
spirits](/about/superior-spirit) regarding every subject of interest to
humankind and their answers regarding the proposed questions were carefully
gathered and organized. Together they constitute a whole
[science](/spiritism/science), a [moral](/spiritism/moral) and
[philosophical](/spiritism/philosophy) doctrine called Spiritism.
[Spiritism](/spiritism) is, therefore, the doctrine founded upon the existence,
manifestations and teachings of the spirits. 

This doctrine is fully exposed in [The Spirits’ Book](/books/spirits-book) with
regard to its philosophical aspect.  Its practical and experimental aspect is
contained in [The Mediums’ Book](/books/mediums-book), while the moral aspect is
contained in [The Gospel according to
Spiritism](/books/gospel-according-spiritism). 

Through the analysis we make here, one can access the variety, extension and
importance of the subjects covered by the doctrine.

As we have seen, Spiritism had its beginning in the common phenomena of the
[turning tables](/about/turning-tables). But since facts speak more to the eyes
than to the intellect, giving rise more to curiosity than to feelings, the
interest in them disappears with curiosity in face of the lack of any sensible
explanation. The situation changed when a theory came to explain cause, when it
was realized that an entire moral doctrine sprang from those dancing tables with
which so many had such a happy time for a short while. 

## The expansion of Spiritism This doctrine speaks to the [soul](/about/soul);
it dissipates the distress of doubts and satisfies the desire for a complete
explanation of the future of humankind that was previously left in the vacuum.
Serious people received the new teachings as a helpful doctrine and, since then,
instead of declining, it quickly spread.  Within a few years it encountered
support worldwide, especially among enlightened people. 

The number of supporters increases daily and one can say that today Spiritism
has obtained its ”right of citizenship”.  It is founded on bases which challenge
the effort of its opponents who are more or less interested in its denial. 

The proof is that the attacks and criticisms could not delay its march for even
a moment.  Its opponents could never explain this simple fact. For the
Spiritists, if it continues to propagate in spite of its criticism, it is
because Spiritism is good and the way of its reasoning is better than of its
opponents.

## The roots of Spiritism Spiritism, however, is not a modern discovery. The
facts and principles upon which it is based were lost in the night of the times,
since one can find its tracks in the beliefs of all people, in all religions and
in the majority of sacred and profane writers. But such facts neither were
properly considered nor their consequences completely deduced, they were instead
interpreted according to the superstitious ideas of the ignorant.

In fact, Spiritism is founded on the existence of the spirits. As the spirits
are only the souls of people and since there were always people, Spiritism could
not have invented or created the spirits.  If the souls or spirits can manifest
themselves to the living, this is a natural fact that, therefore, has always
been so since the beginning of time. Therefore in any place or time one can find
proofs of such intense manifestations, especially in the [Biblical
texts](/gospel).

The logical explanation of the facts, the more complete knowledge of the spirit
nature, of their role and way of action, the revelation of our future state and
finally the gathering of these facts into a scientific and doctrinal body are,
however, modern. The ancient knew its principles, while modern individual knows
its details. In past times the study of these phenomena was a privilege within
certain castes and were revealed only to their initiates. In the middle ages,
those who ostensibly dealt with them were considered warlocks and were therefore
burned at the stakes. 

The very doctrine that the spirits teach today is not new. It can be found in
fragments of the greatest philosophers from India, Egypt and Greece, and
entirely in the teachings of [Christ](/about/jesus). 

Today, there is no longer any mystery, no one burns anyone, everything happens
clearly and everyone is free to learn and practice Spiritism, since there are
[mediums](/about/medium) everywhere.

## The goal of Spiritism So what is then the goal of Spiritism? It came to give
new testimonies, to point out, using facts, unknown or not well understood
truths and to re-establish, in its true sense, misinterpreted ones.

Spiritism teaches nothing new, that is true. But is it not valuable to show, in
an obvious and irrefutable way, the existence of the soul, its survival over
body’s death, its immortality, its future punishments and rewards? 

How many believe in such things, but only with weak and hidden thoughts,
silently wondering: ”And if it were not so?” How many people were brought to
discredit because they were given a future which their minds could not
rationally accept? Is it not admirable, then, if the weak believer could say:
“Now I am sure!”, that the blind could see the light? 

By facts and logic Spiritism dissipates distressing doubts and brings back faith
to those who had lost it.  It unfolds the existence of the [invisible
world](/about/spiritual-world) which is around us and in which we unsuspectingly
live. 

Through the example of the [dead](/about/discarnate), Spiritism shows us our
happy or sad future condition.  It explains the cause of [earthly
sufferings](/articles/why-we-suffer) and shows us a way to soften them. Its
propagation will have as an inevitable effect the destruction of materialist
doctrines which can no longer resist to its evidence. 

Human beings, convinced of the greatness and importance of their future,
[eternal life](/about/eternal-life), draw a parallel between it and the
indefiniteness of the terrestrial life which is so short. 

By their thoughts they elevate themselves above ungenerous human values, and
realize the cause and reason for their sufferings, which are thereupon viewed by
them with meekness and endurance because they understand they are a way for
their improvement. 

The example of [those who come from the beyond](/about/discarnate) to describe
their joys and pains, demonstrating the reality of the future life shows, at the
same time, that God’s justice leaves no wickedness without punishment and no
virtue without reward. 

Finally, we also add that the communication of our dear departed ones brings us
a sweet consolation, showing not only that they continue to live but also that
they are less far from us than if they were in a foreign land.

## A source of peace Briefly stating, Spiritism softens the distress of life’s
sadness, calms the despair and agitation of the soul, dissipates the
uncertainties and fears of the future and eliminates [suicidal
feelings](/about/suicide).  At the same time it brings happiness to those who
believe in it. 

This is the secret of its fast propagation.

## The religious aspect of Spiritism From a religious point of view, Spiritism
is based on the fundamental truths of every religion: [God](/about/god), the
[soul](/about/sould), [immortality](/about/immortal-spirit), future punishments
and rewards. 

It is, however, independent of any particular [cult](/about/cult). Its goal is
to prove to those who negate soul’s existence that the soul survives after the
[body](/about/body), that it suffers after [death](/about/death) the
consequences of the good or evil practiced during its corporeal life. Now then,
this is common to any religion.

As a belief in the [spirits](/about/spirits), Spiritism is also not different
from any religion or people, since in any place where there were humans there
will always be souls or spirits. Its manifestations are natural to all times and
descriptions can be found in all religions without exception. One can,
therefore, be a Catholic or Protestant, a Greek or a Roman, a Jew or a Muslim
and yet believe in the manifestations of the spirits and, consequently, be a
Spiritist. The fact that Spiritism has adherents from all sects is proof of
this.

## A moral perspective In a [moral sense](/virtues), Spiritism is essentially
Christian since it merely teaches the development and application of [Christ’s
teachings](/gospel), which are the purest of all and whose superiority no one
contests.  This proves that such teachings are [God’s law](/divine-laws) and
that it is for everyone.

By being independent of any [cult](/about/cult), Spiritism prescribes none of
them. It preoccupies itself with no particular dogmas nor is it a religion since
it has neither priests, pastors nor temples.  It answers those who ask if it is
of any good to follow such or such practice: If your conscience asks you to do
it, do it and God always takes into account the intention. 

In essence: [Spiritism](../) imposes itself on no one, it is not intended for
those who have a faith or whose faith is sufficient, but rather it is for the
immense majority of unbelievers and insecure. Spiritism does not take these
unbelievers and insecure out of the Church, as they are morally apart from it
already. It makes them walk three fourths of the way; it is up to the Church to
make them walk the rest.

## What Spiritism opposes It is true that Spiritism opposes certain beliefs such
as [eternal punishments](/about/eternal-punishment), the material fire of
[hell](/about/hell), the [devil’s personality](/about/devil), etc. 

However, is it not also true that such ideas, imposed as absolute truths, have
always made and continue to make unbelievers? If, by giving a rational
explanation for such dogmas, Spiritism brings back faith, is it not helping
religion? As a venerable ecclesiastic said: 

> ”Spiritism makes one believe in something. Now, is it not better to believe in
> something rather than absolutely nothing?”.

As the souls are the spirits, one can not deny the existence of the spirits
without denying the souls.  If one admits to the existence of souls or spirits,
the question is then reduced to its purest expression: Can the souls of the dead
communicate with the living? Spiritism proves the affirmative by material facts. 

What proof can be given to the contrary ? If it is so, all negations will not
impede that it continues to be, since one deals with no system or theory but
with nature’s law. Now then, humankind’s will is powerless before nature’s law
and whether one wants to or not, its consequences must be accepted as well as
human’s beliefs and habits adequate themselves to them.

## Source
Written by [Allan Kardec](/bio/allan-kardec) in the 1860s, giving his personal explanation of the 
circumstances that led him to write the Spiritist codification.  

Translated into English by A. L. Xavier Jr. and Carol de Macedo.  
Based on the essay “O Espiritismo em sua mais simples expressão” by A. Kardec, 2nd ed., FEESP (1989).  

