---
title: God's Laws
description: In vestibulum massa quis arcu lobortis tempus. Nam pretium arcu in odio vulputate luctus.
date: "2019-01-01"
topics:
- religion
- moses
- jesus
- spiritism
---

## The revelation of god's laws
The answers to such longings of our sprits, be they these present day desires
that manifest at a conscious level of thought and feeling, or the long term
objectives held deep within our souls, the understanding of God's laws holds the
answers we are looking for.  Over the course of history, many enlightened
philosophers, spiritual teachers, and other significant moral leaders have
played a role in illuminating the pathway for the progress of humankind, by
shedding light on various aspects regarding the true nature of God and the
natural order that regulates the justice and harmony of all God's creation. 

In Chapter 1 of Kardec's book, "The Gospel According to Spiritism", we find an
explanation about the Spiritist interpretation of two important, historical
revelations concerning God's laws, those of Moses and Jesus, followed by
commentary on the subsequent emergence and role of the Spiritist teachings.
The following is an excerpt from this reading:

> "Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not
> come to abolish them but to fulfill them.  I tell you the truth, until heaven
> and earth disappear, not the smallest letter, not the least stroke of a pen,
> will by any means disappear from the Law until everything is accomplished."
> (Matthew 5:17-18)<br><br> Chapter 1 - I Have Not Come To Abolish The Law / The
> Gospel Explained By the Spiritist Doctrine


## Moses
There are two parts to the laws enacted by Moses; the Law of God, which Moses
received on Mount Sinai, and the civil (or Secular) law, which he devised and
mandated himself.  The first Law is unalterable; the second which was designed
to suit the customs and character of people of the people of Moses' era, changes
over time.

The Divine law is based on the  ten commandments. The Law presented in the Ten
Commandments is for all times and all nations, a universality that gives the
commandments a divine character.  

The other laws decreed by Moses were devised to instill, at times through fear,
a sense of order in a people very much agitated and unorganized, whose behavior
and prejudices were still freshly colored by many years of bondage in Egypt.  To
sanction his authority, Moses did claim a divine origin for his secular laws.
In doing so, he followed a practice common among the leaders and lawgivers of
many early peoples.  In those days authority over people was often exercised
under the guise of a divine power.  Only the notion of a harsh God could impress
a relatively unaware people, whose sense of justice and moral values were still
very limited.  Today we realize that a God Who would include among the the
Divine commandments "you shall not murder, and do no harm to your neighbors"
wouldn't contradict that law by sanctioning any type of bloodshed. This only
highlights the transient nature of Moses' secular laws.  

### Jesus
Jesus did not come to abolish the Law defined in the Ten Commandments.  He came
to fulfill and amplify it, to clarify its real meaning, and to interpret it at
humanity's level of progress at the time.  Those elements of the Moasaic code
that emphasize love of God and fellow human beings constitute the very basis of
Jesus' teachings.  

As for the secular laws, Jesus advocated fundamental reforms both in form and
substance.  He fought constantly to correct the abuses of ritualistic worship
and to right misconceived interpretations.  His call for reform could not have
been any more revolutionary than when He reduced the Law to this one principle:
"Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all
your mind; and Love your neighbor as yourself."  He said Himself, "All the Law
and the Prophets hang on these two commandments." [Matthew 22:37-39 ]

Furthermore, by the words "until heaven and earth disappear, not the smallest
letter, not the least stroke of a pen, will by any means disappear from the Law
until everything is accomplished" Jesus wanted us to realize that the Law must
be respected and lived in all its purity, over the whole Earth, and with all its
amplifications and consequences.  What, otherwise, would have been the purpose
of proclaiming the Law if it was going to benefit one nation or a few people?
All human beings are sons and daughters of God; they are without distinction in
God's eyes and subject to the same care and attention.

But Jesus wasn't simply a lawgiver who was offering His word as the one and
final authority.  He also came to fulfill the prophecies that had foretold His
coming.  He derived His moral authority from the exceptional nature of His
spirit and from the Divine mission with which He was entrusted.  Jesus came to
teach humanity that true life is not the one lived here on Earth but in the
Kingdom of Heaven.  He came to show us the pathway to this Kingdom.  

Jesus taught us that the way to reconcile ourselves with God is by experiencing
the events of our lives with an awareness of our higher purpose as human beings.
But He did not reveal everything.   On many subjects He limited Himself to
offering only the initial part of the truth, explaining His silence about the
rest by saying that human beings weren't capable yet of understanding the whole
truth.   

He did talk about all things, but often in a veiled manner.  He knew that, in
order for people to be able to assimilate the integral meaning of His words, new
ideas and knowledge would first have to come into being that would provide the
key to unlock the full extent of His doctrine.  These ideas would only come once
the human spirit had reached a certain level of advancement.  Science,
especially, still had an important part to play in the emergence and development
of human knowledge, and it needed time to mature.


## The Spirits' Doctrine
The Spiritist Doctrine is the new body of principles that reveals, through
indisputable evidence, the existence and nature of the spirit world and its
relationship to the material one.  The spirit world is presented not as a
supernatural element but as one of the living and active forces of Nature, the
source of a vast number of phenomena that even today we don't understand and so
relegate to the realm of fantasy or miracles.  Christ hinted at such a
development on several occasions, and it is because He only hinted that many of
the tings He said have remained beyond our grasp or been wrongly interpreted,
The Spiritist Doctrine offers a key that will help explain all these matters.

The law of the Old Testament was personified in Moses; that of the New Testament
in Christ.  The third revelation can't be personified, however because it isn't
given by a human being but by spirits.  Having transcended the bondage of
matter, spirits now constitute the heavenly voices which communicate to all
parts of the world and through countless intermediaries.  The Spiritist Doctrine
is, in this sense, the collective work of the illuminated intelligences of the
spirit world.  This work brings us enlightenment and offers the means of
understanding the destiny that awaits each of us on our return to the spirit
realm.

Just as Christ said, "I have not come to abolish the Law or the Prophets but to
fulfill them," so it is with the Spiritist Doctrine, which has not come to defy
Christian principles but to help carry them out.  The Spiritist Doctrine teaches
nothing contrary to Christ's message.  Indeed, it develops that message,
explains it in a way that everyone can understand, and makes plain that part of
which it has been known, until now, only in an allegorical form.  The Doctrine
has come at the predicted time to confirm Christ's foresight and to prepare the
way for the realization of future things.  The Spiritist Doctrine is, then, part
of the Christ's design.  As He said Himself, Christ presides over the spiritual
renewal of humankind, laying the foundation of a more divine order on Earth.    


### Notes
Note: This chapter from Kardec's book is completed with teachings from three
spirits ( An Israelite Spirit, received in Mullhouse, 1861; the spirit FÃ©nelon,
received in Poiters, 1861; and Erastus a disciple of the Apostle Paul, received
in Paris, 1863) regarding the three revelations and the New Era brought by
Spiritism.  Check it out in "The Gospel Explained by the Spiritist Doctrine".  

### References
Kardec, Allan. "I Have Not Come To Abolish The Law." The Gospel  Explained By
The Spiritist Doctrine.  Trans. Allan Kardec Educational Society (translated
from 3rd edition in French). Philadelphia, PA. Allan Kardec Educational Society.
2000. 25-28.

## Source
[ExploreSpiritism: The revelation of god's laws](//www.explorespiritism.com/religionrevelation.htm)


