---
layout: default-md
section: The Spirits Book
title: Question 918
subtitle: In vestibulum massa quis arcu lobortis tempus. Nam pretium arcu in odio vulputate luctus.
---

### 918. By what signs can we recognize a man as having accomplished the progress that will raise him in the spirit-hierarchy?

“The elevation of an incarnated spirit is proved by the conformity of all the acts of his corporeal life with universal law, and by his comprehension of spiritual life.”

The truly virtuous man is he who practises the law of justice, love, and charity, in its greatest purity. If he interrogates his conscience in regard to the acts accomplished by him. He will ask himself whether he has done nothing wrong, whether he has done all the good in his power, whether no one has cause to complain of him, and whether he has done to others all that he would wish others to do to him. Being filled with the sentiment of charity and kindness for all, he does good for its own sake, without hope of reward. and sacrifices his own interest to justice.

He is kind, benevolent, humane, for all, because he sees a brother in every man, whatever his race or his belief.

If he has been given him power and riches, he considers them as A TRUST confided to him for the general good;…. If the constitution of society has made other men dependent on him, he treats them with kindness and benevolence, as being his equals in the sight of God; he uses his authority to raise them ethically, and not to crush them by his pride.

He is indulgent for the weaknesses of others, knowing that he too needs indulgence, and remembering the Words of Christ, “Let him that is without sin cast the first stone.”

He is not vindictive, but remembers only benefits; following the example of Jesus, he forgives all offences, for he knows that he will only obtain forgiveness in proportion as he has forgiven.

He respects the rights of others, as established by the law of nature, as scrupulously as he desires those rights to be respected in his own case.

### REFERENCE
SPIRITS BOOK, Book 3 chapter 12 | Characteristics of the Virtuous Man

### Related
TODO

### See Also
TODO